The **procedure** taken for the instructional design of this bLearning enviroment setting was done with cmap tools ([My Cmaps Cloud](https://cmapcloud.ihmc.us/cmaps/myCmaps.html)). 
The maps conceived contains the 4C/ID theoretical structure in the first step that was developed after a first trial for a real but small learning structure which was used to reelaborate that theoretical setting that followed several feedback loops until that 4C/ID structure was clear to be used for a first real learning course. Of course, each time the 4C/ID cmap was used in a new course or learning content some adjustments were made but just with the idea of making easier and clearer the use of those theoretical 4C/ID maps. 

Those maps contains all the guides proposed by 4C/ID of Merriënboer, already embeded in the CLT theory, and they show the two main lines of work while using them: in time, with the broadening of practice, simple "real-life" concrete activities towards concepts and conceptualization, new problems and contexts, with the idea of schema learning, step by step, in small amounts with supportive information, dealing with the germane load interactivity element, progressing towards radom practice (new task classes (TC) contexts), fading the guidance and delayed feedback; and down, meaning, showing the possible learning paths, fullfilled with just in time information, fading guidance, promoting procedure automation, with fading feedback, into the increasing complexity of the subject in a specific TC.

The idea of the use of cmaptools where concerned with the fact that, using complex "real-life" tasks has important implications (Plass et all, 2010, p.126) for the instructional design. The first is the cognitively demanding of the tasks meaning a great instrinsic load to deal with. This means "cutting" the interactivity within the tasks making them more understandable and cognitively friendly in the first contact with the avoindance of extraneous load as much as possible.

About the cognitive load, the focus, during the planning, was on intrinsic and extraneous load rather then germane load, mostly because the goal was on the content rather then the student, that is, focus on making small learning steps with guidance and feedback capability in an variability problem environment. Germane load is considerered in CLT as the mental resources dedicated to processing, constructing, and automating schemas, so it was considered that the dual framework of intrinsic and extraneous load is sufficient and non-redundant, making the boundaries of the procedure not so overwhelming and more clearer for the concrete content creation and implementation (Kalyuga, 2011).

Being that said, the courses structures were organized using cmap tools (see example attached), an online tool were you can organize and develop mind maps about the learning structure to be implemented in the LMS with two major dimentions:
1. In the planing moments the goals/skills were identifyed and classified as recurrent and non-recurrent;
2. For the each one assign a LT within the same real-world based problem but with a high variability;
3. Group the LT in TC: the criteria used was that they had the same knowledge support and the same non-recurrent skills; they were organized in time takin in account the degree of dificulty; 
4. Sequencing TC: from the easy (more simple, pratical and concrete) to the dificult (more abstract);
5. Sequencing LT: from the easy (more simple) to the dificult (more complex, requiring more interrelationship between knowledge); each one was developed in a MOODLE Lesson activity: later on there was available H5P (H5P, https://h5p.org/), a set of interactive media activities that allows richer HTML5 content in existing publishing platforms;
6. Identify simultaneity in diferent/same LT, i.e., it happens that the several LT can have the same recurrent goals: we can choose three ways: (a) we use the LT to reinforce the goal; (b) or we keep it, noticing that the correspondent goal is used in a variable problem; (c) or remove it;
7. Identify anchors: previously knowledge/skill already trained that is remembered as a prior-knowledge that will support this LT; if there is a negative feedback the student can be advised to visit the former activity;
8. For each identified recurrent goal it is assigned a PTP and JIT/PI in order to promote automatization;
9. Apply scafolding for each PTP and each LT;
10. Verify if for each non-recurrent goal it was assigned a TC in a variability problem setting;
11. Define assessment and feedback content and time location withing the model;
12. Define criteria for feedback and progression;
13. Categorize each TC with a knowledge level for the final classification.
14. When drawing the map, in the horizontal, analog to a time-line, the map follows a concrete-to-abstract task classes (TC), each one having to promote the aquisition of higher level conceptual schemas and mental models, integrating a component of a whole-task in a real-world-problem context; before hand, there is the SI that is always available. Along with the SI it was also showned the assessment criteria;
15. In the vertical, within each LT, there are all the media activities organized by PTP/PI, JIT and feedback; some of this has also some quiz with feedback associated;
16. In the cmaptools mind map, there are identified all the media activities needed; after is completion, they were tested and included in the LMS;
17. Later on, all of the TC and LT where identified has gaming levels and feedback was integrated for each media activity failure or sucess;
18. For each activity, it was given a time of completion in order to measure the effort needed for each task and addapt to the classes time table;
19. The activities were available weekly, allowing the students to view not all at the same time but in shunks of material to complete;
20. Allow students to give feedback about their experience and identify errors, like, links that don't work or take them to activities already passed or to ahead.
